Title: Muisne Earthquake, Ecuador – April 16, 2016 (Mw=7.8)
Date: 2016-4-18
Slug: muisne-earthquake-ecuador-april-16-2016-mw7-8

An earthquake of Mw=7.8 (USGS Earthquake Hazard Program) hit the pacific coast 
of Ecuador close to the border with Colombia on April 16th, 2016 (UTC) causing 
large damage and casualties in many localities along the Ecuadorian coast. The 
major city close to the epicentral area (according to the USGS PAGER) is 
Pedernales.

In this post we provide information mostly collected in the framework of the 
project SARA, coordinated by GEM in the period 2014-2015. This is a first 
version completed on April 18th, 2016.

## Past seismicity

In the area where the Muisne earthquake occurred, the Nazca plate subducts 
obliquely eastward beneath the South America plate at a velocity of 61 mm/yr. 
The hypocenter of the earthquake was located at a depth of 20 km and the 
available focal mechanism solutions are consistent with the hypothesis (see 
USGS focal mechanism solution) of a rupture on the main plate boundary, 
immediately below (or just within the limit of) the brittle portion of the 
interface.

Ecuador has a history of large subduction zone earthquakes with several events 
of magnitude 7 or larger occurred since 1900 (1906 Mw=8.35, 1942 Mw=7.8, 1958 
Mw=7.7, 1979 Mw=8.2 and 1998 Mw=7.1). The figure below shows the seismicity 
included in the earthquake catalogue compiled by a large community of South 
American scientists in the framework of the SARA project together with the 
traces of the faults in active shallow crust. The red and the blue stars 
indicate the position of the epicenter of the 2016 earthquake according to the 
USGS and the Geophysical Institute of the Escuela Politecnica National in 
Quito, respectively.

![ ]({filename}/images/2016/miusne/epic_distr_events.png)
*Past seismicity included in the historical and instrumental components of the 
SARA catalogue. The red and blue stars show the epicenter of the Muisne 
Earthquake according to the USGS and Istituto Geofisico in Quito, 
respectively.*

Previous studies (e.g. Chlieh et al., 2014) suggested that some of the 
asperities along the subduction west of the Ecuador coast did not break since 
the last very large earthquake occurred in this portion in 1906 (Mw=8.35). The 
figure below (Chlieh et al., 2014)  shows the spatial distribution of the 
moment deficit along the subduction zone, the position of the main ruptures 
occurred during the last century and the areas where potential gaps were 
identified using non-linear inversion of GPS measurements to determine the 
interseismic coupling distribution.

![ ]({filename}/images/2016/miusne/Screen-Shot-2016-04-18-at-16.09.07.png)
*Subduction interface sources included in the SARA hazard model (Garcia et al., 
2016). The star shows the position of the epicenter of the 2016 earthquake.*

At this link you find an animation showing epicenters aftershocks that occurred 
until April 18th. The distribution seems in good agreement with the finite 
fault solution provided by the USGS.

## Available hazard models 

The most recent hazard models developed for this area are the following ones:

* Petersen et al. (2010)
* Beauval et al. (2014)
* Garcia et al. (2016; in preparation)

In the model of Petersen et al. (2010) the hazard – expressed in terms of the 
Peak Ground Acceleration (PGA) with 2% probability of being exceeded in 50 
years – for the area stricken by the 2016 earthquake is larger than 1.0g. The 
damaged area corresponds to the area exhibiting the highest hazard in Ecuador.

The model of Garcia et al. (2016) developed in the framework of the SARA 
project for the same area indicates values of PGA with 10% probability of being 
exceeded in 50 years in the range between 0.45 and 0.55 g.

The maximum values of PGA computed by the USGS Shakemap system for this 
earthquake are around 0.4g, largely below the values of hazard discussed above. 
A direct comparison between the observed values of shaking and the values of 
hazard computed with a probabilistic seismic hazard analysis must be done with 
extreme caution since the two values have completely different meanings. 
However, should the largest values of shaking computed by the USGS Shakemap be 
confirmed, based on the hazard models considered these can be associated with 
return periods close or lower than 475 years.

![ ]({filename}/images/2016/miusne/rt7_hazard_map-mean-0.002105-PGA_9575_wm.png)
*Seismic hazard map for South America computed using the SARA hazard model 
(Garcia et al, 2016). The map shows PGA with 2% probability of exceedence in 50 
years.*

The subduction source included in the model of Garcia et al. which – presumably 
– generated the 2016 earthquake has a maximum magnitude assigned of 8.8 (see 
polygon i08 in the Figure below). The overall geometry of the fault appears to 
be consistent with the finite rupture solution provided by the USGS although 
the dip angle seems lower in the latter case.

![ ]({filename}/images/2016/miusne/SARA16_interface_model.png)
*Subduction interface sources included in the SARA hazard model (Garcia et al., 
2016). The star shows the position of the epicenter of the 2016 earthquake.*

Want to read more? Please take a look at the [post on the Muisne Earthquake 
published on the GEM integrated Risk 
Blog.](https://gemrisk.wordpress.com/2016/04/18/supporting-the-response-and-recovery-in-ecuador-after-the-16th-of-april-earthquake/)


